---
layout: post
title: Rules-based Writing
---

Writing effectively is essential as an academic.  The Ph.D. experience varies
widely even within a field, but one nearly universal component is a ton of
writing.  My advisor burned through several red pens on my thesis, and I wanted
to capture some of what I learned for future (self-)reflection (and perhaps
it'll come in handy when I have students of my own).

For me, writing is often a humiliating process: I wrestle with big ideas which
are all mixed with millions of details in my mind. I can sometimes spend hours
boggling in vain trying to serialize and organize concepts. What comes out in
the end can be a disaster: no clear flow with details interjected at the most
inopportune places.

Unfortunately, I've found that when I ask for feedback on a draft, I don't get
what I need most.  Advice and feedback is often focused on the details of the
writing: eliminate ornate language, avoid passive voice, and use proper
grammar. These things are all necessary to write well, but, in my experience,
most of my struggles with writing are organizational, not technical.  Overall,
I think people give this type of feedback because its easy: either they didn't
understand the idea and couldn't organize them any better, or they are looking
for a low overhead way to avoid the real work. I'm certainly guilty of this (as
an aside, these days when someone asks for feedback, I try to go as deep as a I
can and then use a timeout to limit the total time cost).

My advisor, [John Ousterhout](http://www.cs.stanford.edu/~ouster), was amazing
about feedback. It was also deep and deeply critical but always provided a
suggested next step. It hard to guess how many hundreds of hours he spent
reading the nonsense I wrote.  Slowly reading and rethinking hundreds of pages
of text gave him time to reflect on my writing pathologies. Eventually, he
began using a shorthand notation when the logical structure of my writing went
astray.

{% comment %} Link his proverb pages {% endcomment %}
If you don't know John, the man is a walking ball of engineering-inspired
aphorisms and proverbs. He seems to be a firm believer that, though life has
complex problems, the repeated application of a small set of rules to life's
problems can decompose an issue.

{% comment %}
I was always skeptical about this. As an arrogant 
{% endcomment %}

In the end, I became a believer. I've listed the set of sins that John
consistently marked in my writing - sometimes many times per page, sometimes
multiple sins per paragraph. These now serve as a set of assertions: whenever I
move my cursor out of a paragraph (either freshly-written or simply modified) I
recheck for any of these red flags.

The rules are easy to verify - they seem almost syntactic. Interestingly,
though, they easily identify conceptual and flow issues. I should say too,
neither my advisor nor I claim credit for the individual rules: but keeping
this small collection of checks was potent for me. They significantly improved
improved the flow of ideas in my writing.

**Topic Sentence (TS)**: 90% of paragraphs must start with a topic sentence.
Is it sometimes advantageous to have topic sentences elsewhere in a paragraph?
Maybe, but don't bother. Putting the topic sentence first gives the paragraph a
clear direction, and it's hard to make an argument significantly harms style.
Another benefit: it's easy to skim though a section (or whole paper) and get
the flow just by reading the first sentence of each paragraph.  Suspense is for
novels and movies: just tell the reader the punchline up front.

*Cheating on TS*: Using a semicolon or colon can be useful to lead into a paragraph
with an independent clause that isn't the topic sentence. This should be
minimized if possible, but it works well when transitioning between concepts.
The key here, is that the reader shouldn't leave the first sentence without
knowing what the paragraph is going to cover.

**Cross Contamination (CC)**: Each paragraph must only cover one idea.  This is
critical to keep from derailing a reader's flow of thought and obscuring the
main point that is being made.  As a detail-oriented engineering-type, I feel
the need to touch on everything that is related to the idea at hand. I think
this stems from a two issues.  First, engineers tend to wildly over-estimate
the importance of technical details, and, second, they worry that someone might
think they are dumb if something is omitted.

Paying attention to cross contamination has another important perk: it pushes
for each idea to have a "home" in the text. Often, I find that I cross
contaminate the same idea into many points in a text. This is a key indicator
that something important isn't explained adequately. When this happens, it's
best to refactor by collecting the fragmented idea into a single place in the
text.

*Cheating on CC*: After a asdffsaafd MESSY  idea has 
After that occasional asides to the idea's new home in the text can be
okay, but don't be paranoid by referencing the same idea all over the place.
  
**Leading with Details (LD)**: XYZ

**Finish the Thought (FT)**: XYZ

**Vague and Mysterious (VM)**: XYZ

Why these work:
- Rote, mindless, simple - like a type checker for the concepts of a paragraph.
- They actually reduce work by reducing the number of decisions to be made.

Worries?
- Short paragraphs? Good.
